Come on.
Thank you.
Mm-hmm.
If
.
Two weeks.
Welcome.
Thank you all for coming. I appreciate that.
Welcome, Mr. Speaker and David and Raf.
It's wonderful to have you this afternoon.
Have you got some opening remarks that you want to make?
And what-
Not too many.
Not too many. I'll hand to you then.
Just very interested in the
lines of questioning people might have
for both of the services. I think
the big change from last year is the passing of the Parliament Act-
Mm-hmm
... which shifts a whole lot of responsibilities back
into Parliament itself,
and states pretty clearly about what the purpose of the place is
and how it should work.
There will be adjustments that are required in that.
If you look at the Office of the Clerk,
one of the things that's emerged,
very quickly this year
is the capacity for
very significant numbers of amendments to be put on the table
in the committee stage of the House.
But also much earlier in the calendar year, we saw the
extraordinary number of
submissions that came in and continues to come in for bills that
are before the Parliament. And
I think it's a reasonable assessment that the capacity of
AI to produce lots of material
from
simple questions
is going to be a challenge for us all as parliamentarians moving
forward. But particularly at the moment, the Office of the Clerk, where they've got
to have the time to be able to assess those
amendments because you can't get away from the
right of members of Parliament to act like members of Parliament,
when it comes to dealing in the legislative process.
With the other thing that's been occupying a lot of
time for the
parliamentary service is the,
I suppose, heightened awareness of security issues for both
the personal
circumstances of members of Parliament, but also for staff in
elected offices.
And as we go into the
2026 election,
a greater awareness too that
some of the
more interesting sort of emails that get sent to
MPs could be acted on, and if they were, that would
be pretty disastrous. So, a broader consideration of how
they might support MPs, or MPs might be supported during that
period of time.
Mm-hmm.
As for my own office, it continues to operate on a fairly
slim basis and which is unusual for me to say
that, but there you go.
It's
seeing some changes with role and title retirement, and that will
bring in a temporary regime up until the election, after which time both the
gentlemen to my left and right will consult with whoever might be
Speaker about where to from there.
But
I hope that it continues to be open to all MPs as it currently
is.
Mm-hmm.
That's all I wanted to say.
Right. Thank you. And we'll open up for questions. And we'll start with Glen.
Kia ora. Thank you. And I think I'll just continue on what you've talked about
around submissions, papers on the table,
um-
Bills going through Parliament. And I guess for both the
Office of the Clerk and Parliamentary Service, my first question is
just around
the money you have going forward. Are you going to be able to meet the
expectations of what's coming? And I looked at, I think it was in April, there'd
been almost 650,000 submissions this term,
which was a 582%
rise in two
parliaments in terms of submissions coming through this place.
But then there's been a huge uptake in terms of 24%
increase in legislation
coming to select committee, et cetera.
So the funding you have now, that going forward, is that enough to sort of manage
what is to come? And also the second part to that is, are you looking at
projections or can you, in terms of what is coming in the next parliamentary
term in terms of submissions and bills and
amendment papers, et cetera?
Yeah. So,
I think you're certainly right to identify that big increase, and that number of
submissions you mentioned is half of all submissions received in the last 30
years, come in this term of Parliament.
Yeah.
So it is a big uplift. Some of that's related to
bills that are contentious, but the number of bills routinely getting more than
1,000 submissions each has increased greatly as well.
So it is a general trend.
We've had a significant uplift in funding, and that was based on what we think we
need in order to support the volume of parliamentary work that
we have now and we're likely to have in the future.
We can't be really precise about it, though, because
really, our work is driven by decisions that you make, as members
and as a parliament and the government make.
So yes, we think so.
But, we don't have any control over the volume or any real levers
to pull other than to do the work. What we want to be able to do, and one of the
things we've received some funding for in terms of investing in technology, is to
help find more efficient ways to deal with that volume of
work,
really so that we can support you
better and more quickly to enable you to do your jobs, particularly in getting
submissions from the public to select committees as quickly as possible,
while still making sure they have the necessary scrutiny for those who are out of
order, defamatory or things like that. So, yeah.
I guess that's the long answer, and the short one is, yes, I think so.
In terms of, obviously, accessibility to Parliament, it's a wonderful thing.
But it also creates challenges like capacity and the ease
of submitting. And of course, we bring in AI and
form submissions that can be copied and pasted.
Mm.
So again, I guess in terms of the funding going forward,
is your office looking at any ways
that can manage that better or ways of engagement with our communities where it
isn't just...
Because often we think the volume of submissions that isn't necessarily
create the outcome of what we're looking for.
Mm-hmm.
So is your office looking in some of those areas?
Yeah. And a few committees have tried out alternative forms of
engagement, surveying people, for example, and aiming to
reach communities that don't participate in the process as
often. And I think there's some value in that work.
The other thing that we've been looking at and talking with the Standing Orders
Committee about is whether there are alternative ways for people to indicate their
views about bills. Quite a lot of submissions, and it's a very large
number, but if all they're saying is, "I do support this bill," or, "I don't
support it,"
writing that down and submitting it through the process is quite a lot of work for
everyone concerned. Whereas there may be another way they can simply indicate
support or not supporting a bill that could also reach the select committee.
Mm-hmm.
So we're talking about options for things like that as well.
And that might mean that we get a smaller total number of
submissions that are all substantive and people who just want to indicate
support or not supporting a bill may have another channel.
Mm.
Which might make things a bit more manageable.
You're careful not to
go to some sort of de facto citizens referendum on every bill.
Yeah.
Because not everything that
is going to be considered in a select committee process is available for all
submitters to consider. It's why we have select committees.
So there's a-
Yeah
... it's a balancing act there. I think the other body of work for
the
Standing Orders Committee is going to be looking at
how do you deal with
600 amendments being laid on the table of the House during the committee
stage. It's a
right, it's an entitlement of members of Parliament to do that, and
there'd be no desire to cut that off.
But there are, in other parliaments,
various provisions in their standing orders to limit
how many
amendments can be made, et cetera.
So there's a need to look at that. I don't think we'll get to that during
this
parliamentary term. The Standing Orders Committee meets
each week of sitting blocks, and has been doing so for quite a
while, so a very broad consideration of standing orders.
But this is a very big bit of work, and it sort of comes right up
against those constitutional rights as well.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
In the Clerk's Office, obviously, your role is
the management of
legislation and standing orders, and it also is to serve us as MPs.
In terms of, I guess the funding bid you put in and the money you got,
is that
enough to be able to serve, I don't mean us as
individuals, but our role as MPs and politicians and the
institution?
Yeah. I believe so. What was contained in the
Office of Parliament Committee report is what we submitted and asked for, and
that's our best estimate of, I think, what we need to deal with
the likely volumes, assuming they're similar to how they've been in this
parliament.
Yeah.
Or they grow a bit.
And my final one on this-
Can I put the supplement? What changes would we, as members of
Parliament, in the way that we work notice?
Um,
in-
In, in, in the changes that you're actually implementing-
Yeah
... what we will notice
I think,
one of the key ones might be if you are on a select committee getting submissions,
that they, uh, if you think about the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi
Bill, where they took months because they all had to be read by individuals.
The aim would be to get them to you much more quickly.
But I mean, in, in that case, that took three or four months to get through them
all 'cause there were hundreds of thousands of people who had to read them.
And what we want to do is develop tools where we can automate some of that
process, um, and flag up to human decision-makers those that actually need
attention and get the rest of them through to you quickly.
So I think you'll see things coming to you more quickly.
Um,
uh, and in other areas you should see no reduction in service,
for example, in drafting of members' bills, there's a bigger volume of those,
um, and dealing with written questions and amendments in committee of the whole
house. Really we want to be able to support the growing volumes of them
without diminishing the service.
And that's all been driven out of the fact that, um, on that, uh,
Treaty Principles Bill, uh, the committee actually had to report before that
it had been able to consider all of the submissions.
Mm-hmm.
So there was a
triage of that activity, but it's, um, time is a constraining thing.
Practically.
And my final, and this one is around AI and are you using that,
and what does it look like in terms of, I guess, protecting, um,
not only the information that's put into it-
Mm
... but also, you know,
uh, we're not fully convinced yet of, of what, you know, the future could look in
that, and where, where does that fit in the clerk's office in this space?
Well, I mean, we've been using automated speech recognition in Hansard for years.
Yeah.
And that's really dramatically sped up the, the turnaround of Hansard,
which used to take about a, a week, uh, between the member saying something and it
being published. Uh, it's now a- available by the next day, in question
time within a couple of hours.
Um, so, so we've been using it in that way for a long time.
That's meant we've been able to redeploy staff, um,
to other work rather than leaving them on transcription.
Um, one of the areas we want to explore and, and we've been funded to look at, is
using AI, um, as, as I just mentioned to Ms.
Lee, to, um, sift through submissions, flag up to
a, a human decision maker, ones that, you know, might fall foul of the standing
orders. The key thing is that there's always
a responsible human being who has to make the decisions, uh, not, not
AI. Another useful area might be in written questions.
Um, you know, there's hundreds and thousands of those.
You're not allowed to ask the same one multiple times.
If when a member's lodging it, they could be told, "This question's just been
answered, and here's the answer," that would allow them to ask a different question
or already have the information they want.
So in areas like that, but we are conscious of the need to have really good
data to support it, 'cause it's only as good as the data it can look at.
Um, and, and also, I guess, our responsibility as custodians of that data to be
careful with it. So we're not rushing headlong into it, but we do see, you know,
value in trying it out. The final area, I think, is, you know, there, there...
I think there'll be tools that could be useful for members in doing your own
analysis. I don't want to tell you how to do it, um, but I do want to make sure
we've got data, um, that's suitable so that you can if you want to use those tools.
Mm.
Okay. And Tim has a sup.
Yeah, I just wanted to come back, Mr. Speaker.
You were talking before about some of the amendments that have been put on the
table. So if I think back to the last budget, one was changing the word
a person's income, then they said, "Well, there's papers," they changed it to their
pay, to their wealth. Uh, one said to change the word income to
moolah. But we can't actually honestly argue that that's,
there's any democratic intent there. Surely our democracy is more mature than that.
Um, and, and another example might just be in, I don't know, commencement dates
changes, something like that,
uh, where... And, and I hear your, your, your point that you made was, well, we
don't want to take away the constitutional right of members to make amendments, but
surely there's a point at which, you know, if we keep the word income as income, do
we have to have ridiculous words replacing it and vote on them all individually?
And if it's a, we're in a party vote system here, you know, if you've
got 10 different options being put by an, by an opposition party, is that
really, you know, if they can't agree on what the, the change should be to,
how is Parliament ever gonna agree to that?
Is, is there a limit, is, is what I'm getting to.
Is there a limit at when it's actually not democratic intent, it's just...
Yeah, I think the, the word that has been used in the past is, is frivolous.
Um, but, you know, i- in the end, the clerk's office work, um,
according to the standing orders that, that guide them in these things, as well as
the conventions of the past.
And, uh, there is a, a desire to, um,
work out whether or not
if a bill has been, uh, uh, and not, uh, let's say, use your example
of, um, person's income to, what was the other one you used?
It was something, their, their moolah or whatever.
Income. It was change the word income to moolah.
Right. Then, then if the intention was to speak that once, then the
House has expressed that it does not want to change it, and therefore any other
amendment should fall to one side.
Those are decisions that need to be supported by, uh, standing orders, and
that's what's, you know, being looked at at the present time.
When it comes to, um, your other point, which was
about, um,
uh, you know, the, does it affect the interior of Parliament, essentially, is
what you're saying. I think it does.
And so we've just got to proceed carefully with all of this.
Yeah.
We've got a sup from Lawrence.
Thank you. Um, thank you so much, Speaker, and
congratulations, Raphael-
Thank you
... um, on 20 years of service. And I do want to follow up on that particular
question because I think it's an important one for, particularly for
Office of the Clerk to consider, is we do hear this government,
for example, saying that while previous government did a lot of things under
urgency, therefore, we are doing lots of things under urgency.
The next government's gonna come in, and then, or next term of Parliament are gonna
come in, well, last term of Parliament did all of these.
And so we're ever-playing this sort of top trump to try and kind of catch
up. And I agree with, I think, Speaker, what you were saying in terms of it may
not support in terms of the time that we're spending here, and this was something
that was explored in a previous hearing as well.
What sort of-
... considerations maybe from through Standing Orders is going to
be there around
constantly changing. I know Standing Orders was changed to be able to conglomerate
and rule out for relevance and et cetera.
Is there any further thoughts around changes?
Yeah, there needs to be more changes. Parliament doesn't sit. It's that simple.
If you look at the order paper at the moment, the amount of work that's been done
by select committees, now sitting there looking for second readings,
then you see that the
choke point in the legislative process is the parliamentary end of
it.
Mm.
And so, as you will be aware, I've proposed
a change to parliamentary sitting hours, which parties I
hope are considering.
And that will be something that would come back to Standing Orders to look at.
But in essence, you can't have, on the one hand,
a capacity to endlessly propose amendments
to legislation. But at the same time say, "Well, it's terrible
that we're having to take these extra hours to try and achieve
things." So it's a bit of a chicken and an egg.
I think Parliament doesn't sit long enough. It's my strong view.
And
the other thing is, I think Standing Orders do need to change to take out
some of that,
effectively,
amendments that everyone knows is not going to pass but will slow up the
process.
And with those changes, let's say we increase the number of sitting
hours, is that something that, from a budget perspective, that there is
allowances for that extra time that's going to be required?
Well, it's likely that if there were to be changes to the sitting hours,
they would occur in the next Parliament.
So it would depend entirely on when that next Parliament first sits.
And then if there's this necessity for supplementary
estimate,
the Parliament bill allows for that to
occur.
Okay, thank you. We've got a primary from Andy.
Yeah, two things I wanted to ask about.
First one, Parliament bill or Parliament Act.
Just one of the key bits in that was the implementation of increased
security arrangements in the precinct, and obviously there's a lot of training and
support that was required for that.
Just wanted to find out how that was
rolling out.
Mm.
And if all the training's been done and a bit of staff are up to where they need to
be and so on.
Thank you. As part of the implementation after the Parliament Act,
we needed to run training courses for the existing-
Yes
... PSOs and then
certify those that
had passed the course. They did the course in
a few tranches because there's quite a few of them.
Yes.
And we had most of the PSOs
have been currently certified. So the
actual arrangement have started.
We hoped that we didn't have to use it for years.
But within three days we had to use the powers.
And I guess that meant that we removed the stage fright of
what that would look like. It went well.
And
it happened
last week or a couple of weeks ago. So
it's proven that the
training that the PSOs had was successful and they
managed those two situations pretty well.
Good stuff. And can I ask another one, but it's not related to that particular
area, which is about-
Is it a quick one?
... precinct. Yeah, it's a quick one.
It's just that we had the conversation, I think, last year when you were here as
well, about money for the precinct.
So we've got money at the moment, which is going into
the upgrade projects and new building and so on.
But it's the ongoing maintenance thereafter, and I think Treasury had sort of said,
"No, we're not really playing ball with that." We've had so much focus on
asset management across other areas of what government does, and
it felt like Treasury, who should've been one of the organizations who really
pushed for that or should be pushing for that, then was sort of not doing it
for Parliament.
Well, you have a hopeful-
Yeah
... hopeful and optimistic view of Treasury and its contributions to the
wellbeing of a nation. I don't.
I think
where we're at at the moment is not an advanced space.
Mm.
But there are some big challenges sitting ahead.
The Beehive needs a lot of work done on it.
And the best way to do that would be to
vacate it for
about 18 months and let it all be done all at once.
So it's a building that was built during the 1970s, opened, I think
in 1979. It's had a couple of interior
goes at it.
But you've got ventilation systems, you've got outside windows, you've got the
structural members on the outside of the building that are all showing significant
deterioration.
Mm.
And some offices up there do actually have plane intrusion-
Yeah. I was told about that, yeah
... during bad weather.
Mm.
So it can't be put off forever. But
that's a discussion that's ongoing at the moment.
The rest of it,
when it comes to the lower library area,
that was brought up to code in, I think,
2018. I think I'm right in saying, around that time.
But then there was
a reconsideration of that code within two years,
and it went from being
67% of building code down to
15.
Mm.
Now there's been another look at those codes because that seemed like an excessive
drop,
and the estimates at the moment are that that building will need some work
but probably not as much as was initially expected.
The challenge is always to make sure that
there is confidence among the users about going back into those spaces,
and the same would apply to the Press Gallery building
above the Beehive Swim Pool, which
is in much the same situation. So,
a piece of paper came down that said, "This is the new..." Determination
and evacuation was immediately implemented.
The question is, was that good information at the time?
According to the calculations required at the time, it was, but that engineering is
now being challenged significantly with the
new approach from the MB people that run this.
So my question really is though, as the custodians of this building,
or this collection of buildings, is we ask lots of organizations now,
Minister of Infrastructure saying he wants to legislate in that direction as well,
say we want asset management plans.
It's then there's the resources being put behind those asset management plans,
which appear to have been unsupported by the organization which you so
dearly love. Are you the Treasury?
Yeah, well, they don't mind waste.
Yeah.
But we did get some funding for a couple of things.
One, to get an asset management system,
which we needed desperately.
Yeah.
So we got the funding for that, which we'll be doing in
the next financial year. And we got money at the previous budget,
to
increase the money we got to fund, to
fix different things, so the
money that we need to repair the different things we need to repair.
And we got some money as well from the Office of Parliament
Committee to just bring us a little bit up to date with
contracts that were climbing because of
CPI,
and increases, but we didn't have that money to cover it.
So those cost pressures seem all right. So I think I agree with Mr.
Speaker. I think we are in a much better space now.
Okay. Primary from Glee.
I want to
continue discussion on security.
And as the Labor's chief whip, obviously I'm aware of all the
things that go on for our caucus, and it's hard to read and see often
what is going on.
10.9 million has been allocated, is my understanding.
So firstly, is that
for
security in general and cybersecurity?
But then secondly, in terms of is that enough?
Because again, I think we're very fortunate in this
country that we do okay, but then I know that we're only
one threat or incident away from
us losing our innocence. So are you confident that that is enough
money to ensure the protection not only of MPs, their families, but
also the staff here and in the eco-offices?
Look, it's something that is under constant review and has
been the whole time that I've been speaker.
And I think
the threat levels that come to MPs now
are just off the charts, in my opinion.
And, as you rightly say, it would just take one person to go
from being the
champion on the keyboard to the terrorist in real life.
And,
so we have good
communications with the New Zealand Police,
and that's probably now, I think, in a better state than it's
been for a time.
That's true.
They're very, very aware
that their role is to... That wasn't him calling or texting .
It was an alert.
Thank you.
To
be readily available, and I think that's a good thing.
I think having our own people
better trained and with little limited amount of
authority to be able to do things is a positive step.
Mm-hmm.
Sort of ramp the system.
Yes, sir.
I think, also,
the
program that we've got supporting MPs who are out
in public.
Mm-hmm.
If there's likely to be a choppy situation, then they can get
security staff who will turn up.
Mm-hmm.
And consequent to that, police will be notified.
But it's an unfortunate trend in New Zealand
politics. Going into the election, we think that's going to be
heightened.
Mm-hmm.
That threat state. And so, a lot of work's going
into that. The police have set up a
command unit that's going to look at
the, assess the
necessity for security around all members of Parliament.
In fact,
we've made it clear it's candidates
as we go into this coming election.
Mm-hmm.
Because
the way I look at it is if there was just one incident-
Yeah
... all hell would break loose. There'd be no issue about funding it.
And we'd probably go to a far more restricted state,
and much more like some other jurisdictions than what we're used to in New Zealand.
So I think we've got to be mindful but careful.
Yeah.
We've got enough. With the level of services we want to provide
now to members, think we are okay. Hopefully we don't
need to provide more. But hopefully we'll also get a little bit more uptake
in different things, and that's when we have to go back and reassess.
But right now, I think it's
fine.
Yeah.
And I think for all of us sitting on this table, I assume we want to be accessible
and want to be able to be out in our communities, so the last thing we want is
to... I think that's the beauty of the New Zealand
democracy.
Mm-hmm.
Is cybersecurity part of that? Because obviously that is a key part of it.
Yeah.
And my second part, just thanks to your staff, because I know they are doing a lot
of work-
Yeah
... to protect us. So cybersecurity is part of that.
Yes, cybersecurity as well.
Are you okay? We started a little bit late, and I have one more primary on my list.
Are you okay to take that, then we go into the ombudsman
part of that? So you're okay to take Lawrence's primary in this part?
Well, let him ask it, then I'll segue right into it.
Fair enough.
It is quite a quick one. Thank you.
Yeah, with that.
I'd just like to check, regarding the latest letter that the Audit Office-
Sorry, yeah, just keep talking. Sorry, I just-
Oh, sorry. Just the latest letter that the Audit Office wrote
to Parliamentary Service regarding the use of- Public fund.
And some of the recommendation there, one of the things was around
funding for publicity approvals and noting what
is parliamentary funded public work-
Mm-hmm
... and what isn't. Can I just check, in this year's budget, have you given any
thoughts to how that could be better managed?
Can I?
Yeah.
For a start, I think that our report was
very favorable to the way in which the publicity assessments are being made.
Absolutely.
And so that was a tribute to the
person who is actually most responsible for that.
Yeah.
Second, I think,
I've had two discussions now with the auditor,
trying to narrow down a lot more clearly what is
parliamentary purpose. Because it's one of these things that dogs us.
It's very easy for people who have never been in this place, who've never
done the job,
to say, "Well, this is parliamentary purpose.
This isn't parliamentary purpose." The only people who really know what the
intention is, is going to be members of Parliament.
Mm-hmm.
And so, I think we're in a pretty reasonable place with the
auditor on that stuff.
And there'll be clear guidelines coming out again for what you can and can't
do during the election period,
so once Parliament dissolves on the 24th of
September or a few days later.
But I think that letter was... I interpret it as being more
a
complimentary letter-
Mm-hmm
... than a problematic letter.
No, you're absolutely right, Mr. Speaker.
Okay. Well, thank you. That brings us to the end of the part with the Office of
the Clerk and Parliamentary Services.
Now we'll have a swap over to the
Ombudsman.
Good. I might just adjust my chair, I think. Just...
Thank
you.
See if that's all
right.
Welcome.
Thank you.
So,
running five minutes late, but we'll still have our 15 minutes if that's okay.
Yeah.
Was there anything that you wanted to start with, Mr. Speaker, here?
No, other than to say,
obviously,
John was here 12 months ago, I think, at the same meeting,
just literally weeks after being appointed into the role.
But so far, I think the
way in which the Ombudsman's office has continued its work
has been without any particular
issue at all. And,
while I am responsible for their
budget,
the Ombudsman is an independent officer of Parliament and not
subject to any direction from my office or
from anybody else, in fact. It's a very important aspect.
I think John's been
quite good in making sure that was upheld.
So with that, I'm happy to hand over to him for any comment he might like to
make.
Any comments you'd like to make.
I won't take too much of the committee's time, but thank you for the opportunity to
appear.
As the speaker says, it's about a year since I've been in the role.
The challenges that were put in front of us at the time of my
appointment was to improve the timeliness of our
complaints process,
to ensure that the approach and model that we operated in the
office didn't continue to require me to come to Parliament every
year and ask for more money as we increased
headcount to respond to increasing levels of
complaint,
to build stronger relationships with the community,
and to improve the impact of the office.
Now, that was already building on a very strong position, so I'm not suggesting it
was weak, but to think about how we might improve impact.
And I'm pleased to be able to say to the committee that I believe we've made
progress against all of those metrics.
The Ombudsman office, of course, is as important now as it has
ever been in enabling trust and confidence
in government to be built and sustained.
And the support that we have received from
Parliament to allow us to invest in
the next financial year in our technology,
to allow us to
move pay of our people in a way that means it
continues to be competitive in the market, enables us
to be confident about our ability to meet the expectations
of this committee, of Parliament, and of the people of New Zealand
into the future.
Thank you. Well, I've got a couple of questions on the list here.
So Lawrence, I've got the first one to you.
Thank you so much. Thank you for joining us.
I know that others have
probably questions around the IT update as one of the capacity, but I want to ask
the first question is, the concerns that was raised by the subcommittee
for OPCAT, for the Operational Protocol to the Convention Against
Torture, which has explicitly addressed the fact that the Ombudsman, the
funding as a national preventative mechanism is not
ring-fenced. In this year's budget, is there any consideration by the Ombudsman
to ensure that there's ring-fenced funding to undertake our obligation on
OPCAT?
Look, I think that
would be a very operational decision and quite specific that would be a bit hard to
answer this afternoon. Now, I know you're going to say-
We'll take that up
... the Ombudsman should be able to-
Yes
... and if he wants to make a comment, he certainly will.
I'm not here to speak for the Ombudsman.
But I think questions like that are sometimes a little difficult to
answer in the round.
Okay. Did you want to make any further comment?
There are different models
around the world in relation to the exercise of the
OPCAT jurisdiction. A number of ombudsman functions
also exercise the NPM function
under OPCAT in various parts of the world.
We have a single,
what do we call it?
Appropriation is the word I was looking for.
Yeah
Appropriation for the office. You'd think I'd know that when I was coming into this
committee, wouldn't you? But there we are.
Appropriation for the office. I can assure you that
the decisions that are taken and the way in which we organize our
work for OPCAT
does meet the obligations and the requirements, in our view,
of the convention.
But what we see in other jurisdictions is that the personnel that is
in charge or involved in making sure that
we function as a NPM under OPCAT, that particular
role is specifically for the role of our obligations under
OPCAT, whereas that role is not
specific within the Ombudsman's
office.
And so that's what I meant in terms of-
Understood
... the appropriation, whether there's any consideration to ensure there is a
dedicated person as opposed to that person doing multiple other jobs,
specifically in terms of obligation
Well, in relation to the OPCAT
resourcing, those resources are focused on OPCAT.
The challenge of OPCAT in terms of visiting places of detention
around the country is a significant challenge,
and there isn't capacity for those people to be doing other things.
The other point that I'd make is that the New Zealand Parliament has determined the
structure of the NPM.
They've determined that the Ombudsman should be able to, is a
part of that NPM, and they've done that because of not
just our capacity in investigating through the OPCAT
jurisdiction, but also because of the augmenting strength
that the Ombudsman Act gives in that context.
Okay. Thank you. Vanoushi.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And firstly, to thank the Ombudsman and
your colleagues, and of course, Mr.
Speaker, for being with us today, but for the important work that you do in terms
of upholding our democracy. I noted the radical increase in terms
of demand on service. I think it was 57% up
in terms of requests for investigation this year to
last. Am I correct that there was also an underspend
in the budget in recent years? I'm just trying to
understand the increasing pressure with the underspend in the
budget.
Yes, there
have been underspends in the budget in recent years.
We're working hard on making sure that that is
not the case as we move forward. We've been investing in
technology within our finance function, as you will have seen with the
FMIS, the new FMIS system, to better
support the office. And as you will have seen in the material,
we have a change process going on within the finance function at the moment, which
is designed to ensure that we have the
capability to enable to support the office
as we go through, particularly this,
significant for this office, technology program in the
next year.
I think we might also mention the balance sheet change,
which gave you an increased amount of funding.
Sure. As the speaker has just said,
it's worth drawing attention to the fact that we've been supported in our
ability to do that work, particularly in relation to the wider
CRM technology change that we have
targeted for next year,
next financial year, by the decision to allow
us to take money off the balance sheet, which was capital-
Yes
... and move it to operational expenditure to support and fund that
initiative. So we're very grateful for that.
Thank you. And just another budget question.
I was a little bit concerned to see the
decrease of 1.1 million due to the cessation of
temporary funding for international development, and
wondered if you could-- It seemed unusual given I understand that it's due
to be completed anyway at the end of this budget
cycle.
So that's right. So the question was: should we come back to Parliament and
ask for a continuation of that funding?
In my view, we can manage our
activity internationally and support, particularly Pacific
Ombudsman's offices, without additional funding.
Could I ask where the reductions might happen in terms, because
presumably that 1.1 million means that you now need to manage that
within operational funding.
Correct. So there's likely less international travel for
our people to go into the Pacific and other
places,
to actually run programs, and more
funded travel by partner countries to bring their
people to us, to enable us to do that.
And there's more online training that we are able to
provide, which is obviously less
costly to-
You'd also be aware that the Tai Kiwa program, Siding Fet,
is bringing significant numbers of Pacific-
Uh, representatives to New Zealand.
Some of them have been wanting to work with the Ombudsman's office.
Some with the Audit Office,
and
then some Parliamentary Service as well.
So,
it's not like the connection is completely lost by one
budget move.
Okay. Lawrence has a supplement.
Just on that, a savings of $1.1 million
in just travel alone seems extraordinary.
Are there other areas other than travel that's also being saved in, or is that
actually just traditionally how much it has cost the Ombudsman's office for?
No, no, I'm not saying it would only be in travel.
As I've said, there are other efficiencies if I'm able then to
use, as we are, apply some of the capability that might
otherwise be applied to supporting other jurisdictions,
to supporting the building of our connections with communities across
New Zealand, which we are able to do.
Then, that is obviously a benefit to the office as well.
So there's a range of benefits in taking
a slightly different approach to the delivery of our
international services.
Right. Thank you. Another primary from Vanushi.
I'm thinking about the budgets ahead for the Ombudsman, which I think are
extremely important, and the context here is we're seeing two things
happening at the same time.
The first is decreasing trust in our public
institutions and some might say an avoidance
of the OIA process and certainly some news stories
recently there. So that's one piece.
We then have extra demand being put on the Ombudsman's office,
so a significant amount of pressure on the team.
I understand that the minister has asked for an
assessment of what the options are that are possible in
terms of changing either the scope of the Ombudsman's
jurisdiction.
I guess my question would be, which way do we go?
Do we either go for reform that allows the Ombudsman to do a
broader job and try and lift that trust, or do we address
the numbers question and draw down the powers of the
Ombudsman?
Well, as you'll be-- Sorry.
As you'll be
aware, the Ombudsman's jurisdictions have grown
significantly over relatively recent years, and we've talked about the
OPGAT jurisdiction, but there's also the oversight and
supervision of Oranga Tamariki. So there are a range of
different
avenues and issues that we are now having to address
within the office. In my view, we have the resources
to be able to address those issues.
If you're asking me whether I would advocate for an
expansion of our jurisdictions, I don't think I
would.
And
the reason that I don't think I would is that I believe that
the combination of the OIA and the
OA and the PDA, which is the Protective
Disclosures legislation, all of which we are able to
draw on, give us a very powerful
mechanism or set of mechanisms to be able to address the
challenges that are in front of us and to build trust in the way that you've
described.
Thank you. I think specifically for me, there remains a question
about
penalties and what we do when we get to the point where we've
seen a breach,
and yet it seems to persist, and should we see the trust continue
to decline, then that might be something we want to address.
And the other proposal which I'm
quite in favor of is looking at what happens when the Ombudsman
makes a direction and nothing is done.
So in other jurisdictions, you would be aware that there's the ability for
those to be returned to Parliament.
And I think about decisions such as the PERU, so the
Persons of Extreme Risk Unit,
very serious obviously, and what might be more
suitable or appropriate in those circumstances.
Well, the reality is that on very few
occasions are recommendations that are made by the
Ombudsman not taken up by the
agencies to which those recommendations are made.
You've talked about PERU, which is one in which there was a recommendation in
relation to the PERD, the
directorate itself,
in which
Sir Peter suggested that it be disestablished.
That hasn't been taken up. That is true.
But even in relation to that report, there were significant
recommendations in relation to
contact between people,
around time in cells, around the way in which that mechanism operated
which have been worked on by corrections and that has made
progress. In relation specifically to the question of
penalties,
while I recognize that it is
tempting to think that you put penalties in place, and I know
that some of the Australian jurisdictions, particularly in the
OIA space, have penalties in
place. In fact, the most powerful
mechanism, in my view, to get agencies to
engage with and comply with our
recommendations is in fact the Public Service Commission
and the fact that the targets set by
the Public Service Commission for individual CEs in
relation to compliance and meeting the requirements of
the OI legislation.
That compliance, as you know, because it's publicly disclosed,
runs at fairly strong levels. So while there is pressure
within the system at the moment, particularly resourcing pressure in
some OI teams , there is still, in my
view, a significant focus And genuine
focus on endeavoring to comply with the legislation.
That doesn't mean there isn't some gaming from time to time, and certainly we
call that out. But I don't believe that turning the ombudsman
function
from an independent, free,
and
basically non-judicial in terms of being able to impose penalties,
into something closer to a judicial function is a good
idea. I think it would actually make it less
attractive to many complainants who come to us
because of the characteristics of the jurisdiction at the moment.
I have three more supps from people, and that's going to bring it to the end at
that point. So Vanushi,
Lawrence, and then Melissa.
Thank you very much. Just going back to your first response.
To confirm, I appreciate that you acknowledge you can
cope with the burden of the current caseload under the current budget, but has
the minister instructed
or sought information about data and the rising costs and
the burden?
I'm not sure which minister you're talking about.
I'm sorry, Minister Goldsmith.
It's an independent agency.
But he can still request information about the-
Not that I-- certainly not to me directly.
If he's been in touch with the office, I'm surprised I wouldn't know.
But no, I don't think so.
Thank you.
Thank you. Lawrence?
Yeah. Thank you. I just want to follow up on what you said before and what
Vanushi Walters has asked. I do want to check then,
in order to maintain public trust of our public
service, and we know there's a couple of investigations, Te Whatu Ora being another
one, what then is the accountability mechanism and what are some of
the mechanisms for deterrence? Because if it's just
recommendation, then
how do we know that the same happen with emergencies?
Well, often our penalty would be electoral failure, wouldn't it?
I think one of the problems that
clearly the
ministry has, ministries have
recent times
where
something might be under consideration by a government or by a
minister to
even take to a government.
And that requires a degree of it will take time.
It will mean that you wouldn't necessarily want to have that or at
all have that as a public discussion because it's a policy
matter.
So I've observed in the House over the
last parliament,
and this one, situations where ministers have been, I think,
quite genuinely endeavoring to reach a policy position,
but then get tripped up because official information comes out that's got
advice that might be contrary to the position that a government
ultimately took. Now, we're not governed by the
people who give us that advice. We're governed by the people who are elected
to make decisions on the advice. So I
can think of two situations where I won't go into, one in the last government
and one now, where ministers were
expected to explain
why they hadn't done something that officials recommended.
Now,
that's the prerogative of the government, and I think you've got to be very careful
about
saying we've got to have
a whole pile of penalties if you don't comply in a timely fashion, et
cetera, to the
OIA requirements.
Okay, and thank you. Last question from Melissa.
Thank you very much. I wanted to go and talk about the factors
in terms of fact, trust. And
previously when you were here, we were actually talking about how often
for the ethnic communities and the minorities don't even understand the concept
of what an ombudsman is. And one of the things that we
discussed was potentially reaching out from the Ombudsman's office.
I see that you've been reaching out to the ethnic communities.
So what is that all about?
Well, it's all about doing exactly what you've described, which is
about
ensuring that all communities in this country
know about the office, understand the jurisdictions of the office, and
understand that they can come to the office to
support them if they have issues with elements
of the Crown.
Sure. Framed it as how were you received and how did they react to the
information?
Yeah. So, I think if you go into a room generally
with various of our ethnic communities,
and you, say, ask the question, how many of you know what the ombudsman
is and what they do-
Like-
... you'll get a very, very, very small showing of hands.
But there is real interest once you explain what
the ombudsman does. And obviously, we have materials that are available
to support that advocacy.
We've had a very good engagement with the Asian Family
Services group up in Auckland recently,
who are doing some very, very interesting social services work,
and we're very keen to align and engage, and
similarly with Iwi Māori, similarly with the-
Pasifika
... Pasifika communities around the country.
Well, that brings us to the end, and thank you very much, both of you, for
your engagement with us this afternoon.
Thank you.
Thank you. See you later.